docs(parachain): design for statement-distribution (#4379)
ChainSafe/gossamer: docs/docs/design/statement-distribution.md

2. [NetworkBridgeTxMessage::SendValidationMessage](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/subsystem-types/src/messages.rs#L416C2-L416C23)

Send a message to one or more peers on the validation peer-set.

3. [NetworkBridgeTxMessage::ReportPeer](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/subsystem-types/src/messages.rs#L410)

4. [CandidateBackingMessage::Statement](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/subsystem-types/src/messages.rs#L112)

Note a validator's statement about a particular candidate in the context of the given relay-parent. Disagreements about validity must be escalated to a broader check by the Disputes Subsystem, though that escalation is deferred until the approval voting stage to guarantee availability. Agreements are simply tallied until a quorum is reached.

5. [ProspectiveParachainsMessage::GetHypotheticalMembership](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/subsystem-types/src/messages.rs#L1411)

> Get the hypothetical or actual membership of candidates with the given properties under the specified active leave's fragment chain. For each candidate, we return a vector of leaves where the candidate is present or could be added. "Could be added" either means that the candidate can be added to the chain right now or could be added in the future (we may not have its ancestors yet). Note that even if we think it could be added in the future, we may find out that it was invalid, as time passes. If an active leaf is not in the vector, it means that there's no chance this candidate will become valid under that leaf in the future. If `fragment_chain_relay_parent` in the request is `Some()`, the return vector can only contain this relay parent (or none).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get the hypothetical or actual membership of candidates with the given properties under the specified active leaf associated fragment chain. For each candidate, we return a vector of leaves where the candidate is present or could be added. "Could be added" either means that the candidate can be added to the chain right now or could be added in the future (we may not have its ancestors yet). Note that even if we think it could be added in the future, we may find out that it was invalid, as time passes. If an active leaf is not in the vector, it means that there's no chance this candidate will become valid under that leaf in the future. If `fragment_chain_relay_parent` in the request is `Some()`, the return vector can only contain this relay parent (or none).
```

# Statement Distribution

> This subsystem is responsible for distribute signed statements that we have generated and forwarding statements generated by our peers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This subsystem is responsible for distributing signed statements that we have generated and forwarding statements generated by our peers.
```

## Subsystem Structure

> The subsystem needs to handle couple channels, beyond the overseer channel we also need to manage request and responses channels that are generated by spawned goroutines, these goroutines are called "responders" and in the parity's implementation there exists 2 "responders", *larger_statement_responder* (legacy) and *candidate_responder* (v2).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The subsystem needs to handle multiple channels, beyond the overseer channel we also need to manage request and responses channels that are generated by spawned goroutines. These goroutines are called "responders" and in the parity implementation there exists 2 "responders", *larger_statement_responder* (legacy) and *candidate_responder* (v2).
```

> The responsability of these "responders" are to listen for incoming requests, foward them to inside the statement distribution (as they are spawned goroutines), which will reach the target function that will respond the request properly, the "responders" also act like a limiter on the amount of requests we are capable to handle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The responsibility of these "responders" is to listen for incoming requests and forward them to inside the statement distribution (as they are spawned goroutines), which will reach the target function that will respond to the request properly. The "responders" also act as a limiter on the amount of requests we are capable of handling.
```

 
For V2:

> - Incoming request type [AttestedCandidateResponse](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/protocol/src/request_response/v2.rs#L32)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Incoming request type [AttestedCandidateRequest](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/protocol/src/request_response/v2.rs#L32)
```

- Response type [AttestedCandidateResponse](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/protocol/src/request_response/v2.rs#L47)
- The handler [answer_request](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/c0921339f9d486981b3681760ee83ba9237f2eaa/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L3245)

For V1 (No need for handling such requests or implementing the handlers, will be removed soon see https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/4447):
- Incoming request type [StatementFetchingRequest](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/c0921339f9d486981b3681760ee83ba9237f2eaa/polkadot/node/network/protocol/src/request_response/v1.rs#L196)
- The handler [handle_responder_message](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/c0921339f9d486981b3681760ee83ba9237f2eaa/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/legacy_v1/mod.rs#L1896)

The V2 brings a new advantage, the validators don't send each other heavy `CommitedCandidateReceipt`, but instead request them lazily through request/response protocols.

> The messages that validators can exchange are: `Statement`, contains only a signed compact statement, `BackedCandidateManifest`, advertise a description of a backed candidate and stored statements and `BackedCandidateAcknowledgement`, acknowledges that a backed candidate is fully known.

Reviewer 2: nit/can we make these a list? IMO is easier to read that way

### Messages Received

> The subsystem must be registered with the overseer and handle two subsystem-specific messages from it:

Reviewer 2: In this list, sometimes the description is above and sometimes it is below, can we be consistent with the placement

Reviewer 3: I think they are all below, it's just that some don't have a description.

> The subsystem must be registered with the overseer and handle two subsystem-specific messages from it:

Reviewer 3: Are there really two subsystem-specific messages or is this a copy&paste bug? :) And which ones in the list below are subsystem-specific? Should be those that start with `StatementDistributionMessage::`, right (not sure why `NetworkBridgeUpdate` is part of that though)? Can you move them to the top of the list to make it clearer?

Author: There are [3 messages](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/b8da8faa0a675afbed1c9ed5d524a674e93910b9/polkadot/node/subsystem-types/src/messages.rs#L826) this subsystems receive:
- `StatementDistributionMessage::Share`
- `StatementDistributionMessage::Backed`
- `StatementDistributionMessage::NetworkBridgeUpdate`

> not sure why NetworkBridgeUpdate is part of that though

The network bridge when it receives messages like `Manifest`, `Acknowledgment` or `Seconded` it forwards these messages to the `StatementDistribution` subsystem

Get the hypothetical or actual membership of candidates with the given properties under the specified active leave's fragment chain. For each candidate, we return a vector of leaves where the candidate is present or could be added. "Could be added" either means that the candidate can be added to the chain right now or could be added in the future (we may not have its ancestors yet). Note that even if we think it could be added in the future, we may find out that it was invalid, as time passes. If an active leaf is not in the vector, it means that there's no chance this candidate will become valid under that leaf in the future. If `fragment_chain_relay_parent` in the request is `Some()`, the return vector can only contain this relay parent (or none).

6. [NetworkBridgeTxMessage::SendRequests](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/subsystem-types/src/messages.rs#L433)

Sends request via normal network layer

## Subsystem State

> The Statement Distribution subsystem currently have 2 states to manager under current implementation but here we should focus under `v2::State` given that `v1::State` is legacy code and will be removed soon see https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/4447.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Statement Distribution subsystem currently has 2 states to manage under the current implementation but here we should focus on `v2::State` given that `v1::State` is legacy code and will be removed soon see https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/4447.
```

> The state holds the implicit view, candidates (a tracker for all knwon candidates in the view), per-relay-parent state, per-session state, unused topologies (topologies might be received before the first leaf update, so we should cache it), peers view and state, keystore, authorities (a map from authotity id to peer id), request and response manager

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The state holds
- the implicit view
- candidates (a tracker for all known candidates in the view)
- per-relay-parent state
- per-session state
- unused topologies (topologies might be received before the first leaf update, so we should cache it)
- peers view and state
- keystore, authorities (a map from authotity id to peer id)
- request and response manager
```

This handler deals with multiple kinds of messages from the overseer (also other subsystems):

- **OverseerSignal::ActiveLeaves**: we should implement the [`v2::handle_active_leaves_update`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L578) and also [v2::handle_deactivate_leaves](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L798)

- **StatementDistributionMessage::Share**: this message is handled by [`v2::share_local_statement`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L1181), where a local originated statement is imported and need to be distributed to peers, calls [`v2::circulate_statement`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L1343-L1344)

> - **StatementDistributionMessage::NetworkBridgeUpdate**: messages comming from network bridge might labeled with its version. We should focus only on messages labeled `Version::V2` and `Version::V3` and for messages targeting the current protocol they are handled by [`v2::handle_network_update`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L428). The message from the network bridge can unwrap in one of the following messages:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **StatementDistributionMessage::NetworkBridgeUpdate**: messages coming from network bridge might be labeled with its version. We should focus only on messages labeled `Version::V2` and `Version::V3`. Messages targeting the current protocol are handled by [`v2::handle_network_update`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L428). The message from the network bridge can unwrap in one of the following messages:
```

    - `StatementDistributionMessage::V3(protocol_v3::StatementDistributionMessage::BackedCandidateManifest)`: handled by [`handle_incoming_manifest`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L2339-L2340)
    - `StatementDistributionMessage::V2(protocol_v2::StatementDistributionMessage::BackedCandidateKnown)`: handled by [`handle_incoming_acknowledgement`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L2726-L2727)
    - `StatementDistributionMessage::V3(protocol_v3::StatementDistributionMessage::BackedCandidateKnown)`: handled by [`handle_incoming_acknowledgement`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L2726-L2727)

> - **StatementDistributionMessage::Backed**: handles the notification of a candidate being backed, the candidate should be known before to be handled correctly, if the candidate is not known the message is droped, this calls [`provide_candidate_to_grid`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/76a292b23bf6f35156fd3dd832e9c4ec31b24b2c/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L1983C10-L1983C35) which provides the a backable candidate to the grid and dispatchs backable candidates announcements and acknowledgments via grid topology, if the session topology is not yet available then it will be a noop. Next method used is [`prospective_backed_notification_fragment_chain_updates`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/76a292b23bf6f35156fd3dd832e9c4ec31b24b2c/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L2309) which retrieve hypothetical membership from Prospective-Parachains and send them to Candidate-Backing subsystem as fresh statements through the function [`send_backing_fresh_statements`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/41a5d8ec5f3d3d0ff82899be66113b223395ade5/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L1929).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **StatementDistributionMessage::Backed**: handles the notification of a candidate being backed. The candidate should be known before to be handled correctly if the candidate is not known the message is dropped. This calls [`provide_candidate_to_grid`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/76a292b23bf6f35156fd3dd832e9c4ec31b24b2c/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L1983C10-L1983C35) which provides the a backable candidate to the grid and dispatchs backable candidates announcements and acknowledgments via grid topology, if the session topology is not yet available then it will be a noop. Next method used is [`prospective_backed_notification_fragment_chain_updates`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/76a292b23bf6f35156fd3dd832e9c4ec31b24b2c/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L2309) which retrieve hypothetical membership from Prospective-Parachains and send them to Candidate-Backing subsystem as fresh statements through the function [`send_backing_fresh_statements`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/41a5d8ec5f3d3d0ff82899be66113b223395ade5/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L1929).
```

- [answer_request](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/41a5d8ec5f3d3d0ff82899be66113b223395ade5/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L3245-L3246)

Given a [`AttestedCandidateRequest`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/82117ad53fc68e8097183e759926b62265ffff0a/polkadot/node/network/protocol/src/request_response/v2.rs#L32) request we should respond the request for the asked candidate hash.

## Grid Mode

> Here is a brief explanation around the function [`build_session_topology`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/41a5d8ec5f3d3d0ff82899be66113b223395ade5/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/grid.rs#L118-L119) that is an important part to define our sender/receivers in the grid mode topology

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is a brief explanation of the function [`build_session_topology`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/41a5d8ec5f3d3d0ff82899be66113b223395ade5/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/grid.rs#L118-L119) that is an important part to define our sender/receivers in the grid mode topology
```

> The [`build_session_topology`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/41a5d8ec5f3d3d0ff82899be66113b223395ade5/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/grid.rs#L118-L119) builds a view of the topology for the session. The network bridge gives us the entire grid topology for a certain session, in there we know ours neighbors in the X axis and Y axis (based on our validator index), so together with the [`Groups`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/5ca726750da563c46449f9aa915296e6c6967e61/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/groups.rs#L28) which is the validator groups whithin the session we can define what will be the peers we expect receiving messages and the peers we should send messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The method [`build_session_topology`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/41a5d8ec5f3d3d0ff82899be66113b223395ade5/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/grid.rs#L118-L119) builds a view of the topology for the session. The network bridge gives us the entire grid topology for a certain session. In it, we know our neighbors in the X axis and Y axis (based on our validator index). So together with the [`Groups`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/5ca726750da563c46449f9aa915296e6c6967e61/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/groups.rs#L28), which is the validator group within the session, we can define the peers we expect to receive messages and the peers we should send messages to.
```

> 1. We should not send `Manifests` or `Acknowledgements` to validators in the same groups as ours, they are already present in the Cluster topology, we should send those messages to peers in the same "row" and "column" as ours if they are not part of our group.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. We should not send `Manifests` or `Acknowledgements` to validators in the same group as ours. They are already present in the Cluster topology. We should send those messages to peers in the same "row" and "column" as ours if they are not part of our group.
```

> 2. if the validator is not in the same group, we should check if we share the same "row" or "column", if we share the same **ROW** then I expected to receive messages from him, and I will propagate his messages with my **COLUMN** neighbors that are not part of the sender's group. Is the same logic in the other way around if we share the same **COLUMN** then I expected to receive messages from him, and I will propagate his messages with my **ROW** neighbors that are not part of the sender's group.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. if the validator is not in the same group, we should check if we share the same "row" or "column". If we share the same **ROW** then I expect to receive messages from him, and I will propagate his messages with my **COLUMN** neighbors that are not part of the sender's group. It's the same logic the other way around. If we share the same **COLUMN** then I expect to receive messages from him, and I will propagate his messages with my **ROW** neighbors that are not part of the sender's group.
```

Take the example:

![Grid Topology Example](../assets/img/sd_img1.jpeg)

> 1) Considering that **J** is our validator index, we share X axis with **[I, K, J]** and Y axis with **[B, F, N]**, lets say that a message comming from `B` arrives, we can only propagate the message to validator `I`, as `K` and `L` are from the same group as `B`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1) Considering that **J** is our validator index, we share X axis with **[I, K, J]** and Y axis with **[B, F, N]**, lets say that a message coming from `B` arrives, we can only propagate the message to validator `I`, as `K` and `L` are from the same group as `B`.
```

2) Considering that we, `J`, want to share a `Manifest` with our grid neighbors, we can send the message to **[I, K, J]** and **[B, F, N]** as they are not part of the group I belong to.

## Request and Response Managers

Whenever we're [`handling an incoming statement`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L1549-L1550) or [`handling an incoming manifest`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L2339-L2340) we do check if we have the related candidate, if we don't know it we should request if from the peer and that is made through [`RequestManager`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/requests.rs#L162) and [`ResponseManager`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/requests.rs#L429).

> The outgoing requests are manager by the request manager, and it is responsible also for holding requests that failed and mark them to retry later. After the Statement Distribution finishes to handle some message it calls [`v2::dispatch_requests`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/lib.rs#L303) which will drain the requests in the [`RequestManager`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/requests.rs#L162) manager queue and will now track the in-flight requests in the [`ResponseManager`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/requests.rs#L429), that is made through a communication channel, the request will be sent to `NetworkBridgeSubsystem` and the `ResponseManager` will wait until any info comes through communication channel pipe ([`receive_response`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L3067)), when that happens the message will be handled by Statement Distribution Subsystem under [`handle_response`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L3088).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The outgoing requests are managed by the request manager, and it is responsible also for holding requests that failed and marking them to retry later. After the Statement Distribution finishes to handling some message it calls [`v2::dispatch_requests`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/lib.rs#L303) which will drain the requests in the [`RequestManager`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/requests.rs#L162) manager queue and will now track the in-flight requests in the [`ResponseManager`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/requests.rs#L429), that is made through a communication channel, the request will be sent to `NetworkBridgeSubsystem` and the `ResponseManager` will wait until any info comes through communication channel pipe ([`receive_response`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L3067)), when that happens the message will be handled by Statement Distribution Subsystem under [`handle_response`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/f4a196ab1473856c9c5992239fcc2f14c2c42914/polkadot/node/network/statement-distribution/src/v2/mod.rs#L3088).
```

6. [NetworkBridgeTxMessage::SendRequests](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/3d8da815ecd12b8f04daf87d6ffba5ec4a181806/polkadot/node/subsystem-types/src/messages.rs#L433)

- Sends request via normal network layer

## Subsystem State

The Statement Distribution subsystem currently has 2 states to manage under the current implementation but here we should focus on `v2::State` given that `v1::State` is legacy code and will be removed soon see https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/4447.

The state holds
- the implicit view
- candidates (a tracker for all known candidates in the view)
- per-relay-parent state
- per-session state
- unused topologies (topologies might be received before the first leaf update, so we should cache it)
- peers view and state

> - keystore, authorities (a map from authotity id to peer id)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- keystore
- authorities (a map from authority id to peer id)
```
